5 Network Layer




5 Network Layer


5.1 Overview




                                     Figure 5-1 Network layer overview

The network layer sits above the data link layer and provides services for both the transport and
transaction layers. It has the following key functions.

      ⚫    Network address management: Manages network addresses using both standard IP and
           CNA formats to ensure compatibility and efficiency with various protocols. The addresses in
           a UB domain can be set up by dynamic or static configurations.
      ⚫    Routing and multipath load balancing: The network layer provides routing services for upper-
           layer protocols within and across UB domains. It supports end-to-end multipath
           communication and offers two load balancing modes: per-packet and per-flow. Additionally, it
           allows upper-layer protocols to specify the working mode of service flows, which significantly
           improves multipath network utilization.
      ⚫    Quality of service: Provides differentiated service qualities by assigning service levels (SLs)
           to upper-layer protocol traffic. Each SL maps to a virtual lane (VL) according to an SL-to-VL
           mapping table maintained by UBPUs. The scheduling between virtual lanes (inter-VL
           scheduling) ensures the prioritized forwarding.
      ⚫    Congestion detection and marking: Supports multiple congestion marking modes.
      ⚫    Network isolation: Supports traffic isolation function between IP address-based network
           interface devices.
      ⚫    Deadlock avoidance: Uses adaptive routing, VL switching, timeout-based packet dropping,
           and combinations to avoid and resolve deadlocks.
      ⚫    Invariant cyclic redundancy check (ICRC): Covers immutable fields in data packets to ensure
           data integrity.



unifiedbus.com                                                                                          144
5 Network Layer



5.2 Network Header (NTH)

5.2.1 Packet Header Based on the 16-Bit CNA Format
         Byte 0                   Byte 1                      Byte 2                        Byte 3
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
                     LPH                               RT                       LPH
                    SCNA                                                   DCNA




                                                                                               Mgmt
                      CCI                                      LBF                  SL                NLP


                                               Payload
                            Figure 5-2 NTH based on the 16-bit CNA format

                      Table 5-1 NTH fields based on the 16-bit CNA format
 Field      Bit   Description
 RT         2     Routing type. For details, see Section 5.3.2.
 SCNA       16    Source CNA.
 DCNA       16    Destination CNA.
 CCI        16    Congestion control indicator, which is used to transmit congestion control
                  information. For details, see Section 5.3.5.
 LBF        8     Load balance factor, which can be used as a multipath selection factor. The value
                  of the LBF field is generated by the sender. The value and definition of the field
                  are not constrained by this specification. For details, see Section 6.5.
 SL         4     Service level, which is used to indicate the packet priority on a link.
 Mgmt       1     LPH.CFG = 6: UBFM privilege bit. The value of this bit in the packet sent by the
                  UBFM is 1.
                  LPH.CFG = 9: This bit is invalid and SHALL be 0.
                  For details, see Section 10.4.1.1.
 NLP        3     Next layer protocol, which indicates the packet format following the NTH.
                  LPH.CFG = 6:
                  ● 3'b000: The next layer packet header is CTPH, where the subsequent packet
                    header is indicated by CTPH.NLP. For details, see Section 6.2.1.
                  ● 3'b001: The next layer packet header is 16-bit UPIH, which is used to
                    enumerate management commands. For details, see Appendix B.3.
                  ● Others: Reserved
                  LPH.CFG = 9:
                  ● 3'b000: The next layer packet header is TAH, without TPH, EIDH, or UPIH. For
                    details, see Section 7.2.
                  ● Others: Reserved




unifiedbus.com                                                                                          145
5 Network Layer



5.2.2 Packet Header Based on the 24-Bit CNA Format
         Byte 0                    Byte 1                       Byte 2                      Byte 3
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
                      LPH                                 RT                     LPH
                                   SCNA                                                 DCNA [23:16]
                  DCNA [15:0]                                                  CCI




                                       RSVD
          LBF                 SL              NLP                            Payload


                            Figure 5-3 NTH based on the 24-bit CNA format

                      Table 5-2 NTH fields based on the 24-bit CNA format
 Field     Bit    Description
 RT        2      Routing type. For details, see Section 5.3.2.
 SCNA      24     Source CNA.
 DCNA      24     Destination CNA.
 CCI       16     Congestion control indicator, which is used to transmit congestion control
                  information. For details, see Section 5.3.5.
 LBF       8      Load balance factor, which can be used as a multipath selection factor. The value
                  of the LBF field is generated by the sender. The value and definition of the field are
                  not constrained by this specification. For details, see Section 6.5.
 SL        4      Service level, which is used to indicate the packet priority on a link.
 NLP       3      Next layer protocol, which indicates the packet format following the NTH.
                  3'b000: CTPH
                  3'b010: RTPH
                  Others: Reserved


5.2.3 Packet Header Based on the IP Address Format
         Byte 0                    Byte 1                      Byte 2                       Byte 3
 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
                      LPH                                 RT                     LPH
                      CCI                                      RSVD                     NPI [24:16]
                   NPI [15:0]                                               IP Header
                                               IP Header
                                                    ...
                   IP Header                                             UDP/TCP/ICMP/...
                                                    ...
                            Figure 5-4 NTH based on the IP address format




unifiedbus.com                                                                                         146
5 Network Layer



The UB network layer MAY be compatible with IPv4/IPv6 addressing. It adds UB network fields before
the standard IP packet header, enabling features like network traffic isolation, edge-network load
balancing, and various congestion marking options. The NTH based on the IP address format is shown
in Figure 5-4. The fields of the NTH are defined as follows:

                         Table 5-3 NTH fields based on the IP address format
 Field           Bit      Description
 RT              2        Routing type. For details, see Section 5.3.2.
 CCI             16       Congestion control indicator, which is used to transmit congestion control
                          information. For details, see Section 5.3.5.
 NPI             25       Network partition identifier. For details, see Section 5.3.3.


When the UB protocol stack uses UDP to transmit communication traffic, the value of the destination
port is 4792 (registered with IANA Service Name and Transport Protocol Port Number Registry). The
usage specifications for certain fields in the IP header and UDP header are as follows:
                         Table 5-4 IPv4 headers used by the UB protocol stack
 IPv4 Header Fields        Usage Description
 Internet Header           Set to 5; option field not supported.
 Length (IHL)
 Type of service (ToS)     DSCP is used to prioritize traffic based on the ToS.
                           The ECN field is not used in the UB domain and MAY be set to any value.
 Total length              Length from the IPv4 header (included) to the ICRC (included).
 Flags                     Set to 0b010; fragmentation is not supported.
 Fragment offset           Set to 0; fragmentation is not supported.
 Protocol                  Set to 0x11. The transport layer is UDP.


                         Table 5-5 IPv6 headers used by the UB protocol stack
 IPv6 Header Fields            Usage Description
 Traffic class            DSCP is used to prioritize traffic based on the ToS.
                          The ECN field is not used in the UB domain and MAY be set to any value.
 Payload length           Length from the IPv6 header (excluded) to the ICRC (included).
 Next header              Set to 0x11. The transport layer is UDP.


                         Table 5-6 UDP headers used by the UB protocol stack
 UDP header of UB
                          Usage Description
 stack
 Source port              Source port ID, which MAY be used as a load balancing factor. The value is
                          generated by the sender and is not restricted in this specification.
 Destination port         Set it to 4792 (IANA Service Name and Transport Protocol Port Number Registry).




unifiedbus.com                                                                                         147
5 Network Layer



 UDP header of UB
                        Usage Description
 stack
 Length                 Length from the UDP header to the ICRC.
 Checksum               Set to 0.


5.3 Network Layer Features

5.3.1 Network Address Management




                                    Figure 5-5 Network address format

The UB network uses 32-bit or 128-bit addresses. Multiple entities on a shared port MAY use the same
address if needed. Packets on the UB link can use either a full address or a compact network address
(CNA) format. For example:

      ⚫   A complete 32-bit or 128-bit network address MAY be used as an IP address for
          communication within a domain or across domains, for example, packets with LPH.CFG=3/4
          (see Appendix B.2).
      ⚫   A 16-bit or 24-bit CNA MAY be used for communication within a domain, for example,
          packets with LPH.CFG=6/7/9 (see Appendix B.2).

UB Controllers, their ports, and UB Switches are normally assigned with network addresses according
to their locations in the network topology. A UB Controller's address is known as the primary CNA, while
its port address is called the port CNA. IP addresses cannot be assigned to the ports.

The system administrator SHALL plan network address prefixes for the UB domains and determine the
specific allocation method. UBFM manages the network addresses and routing configurations within the
UB domains based on the interconnect topology.


5.3.2 Routing Mechanisms

5.3.2.1 Basic Routing Mechanism

The network layer supports routing with full network addresses or CNAs. Both the UB Switch and UB
Controller SHALL include a routing module. This specification defines the requirements and does not




unifiedbus.com                                                                                      148
5 Network Layer



constrain how the routing module is implemented. The UB Switch or UB Controller submits the
destination network address to the routing module. The module then returns a set of egress ports. This
response may include optional costs and/or vendor-specific information. The optional cost indicates the
path weight, which may represent metrics such as hop count, bandwidth, or user-defined custom
values. The UB Controller or UB Switch SHALL choose the right transmit port for the packet using the
routing type (RT) and multipath selection factor from the list of available egress ports. The multipath
selection factor is determined or defined by the vendor.




                               Figure 5-6 Network layer routing mechanism

During packet generation, upper-layer applications select the RT based on communication task
requirements, such as order preservation and bandwidth utilization. Both UB Controller and UB Switch
can perform load-balancing based on the RT information. The RT field in the packet header is defined
as follows:

                                  Table 5-7 Definition of the RT field
 RT Settings      Load Balancing
                                     Multipath Route Selection Policy
 (2-Bit)          Mode
 00               Per-flow           Routing based on all available paths indicated in the routing table.
 01               Per-packet         Routing based on all available paths indicated in the routing table.
 10               Per-flow           Routing based on the shortest paths indicated by the routing table.
 11               Per-packet         Routing based on the shortest paths indicated by the routing table.


When the upper-layer protocol requires the network layer to provide in-order delivery, per-flow load
balancing mode SHALL be used; otherwise, per-packet load balancing mode MAY be used.


5.3.2.2 Routing Processing on UB Controllers

The UB Controller (initiator) SHALL select an egress port to send a transaction request to the target.
The source network address in the network packet header is derived from the network address
assigned to this selected port, as shown in the following figure:




unifiedbus.com                                                                                             149
5 Network Layer




                              Figure 5-7 Routing mechanism of the UB Controller

Some general rules regarding primary CNA and port CNA are as follows:
      ⚫     In case a packet is destined for the primary CNA, it MAY be received through any of the ports
            of the target.
      ⚫     In case a packet is destined for a Port CNA, it SHALL be received only through the ports of
            the target device assigned to that specific CNA.
      ⚫     It is RECOMMENDED that the port CNA of the selected egress port be used as the source
            network address. An alternative CNA designated by the implementer can also be used for
            optimization purposes.
      ⚫     The destination network address of the transaction response packet MAY use the source
            network address of the corresponding transaction request packet, so that the transaction
            response packet can be received by the Initiator port that sends the transaction request packet.


5.3.2.3 Routing Processing on UB Switches

A UB Switch can be configured with a single network address for management and control purposes.
The UB Switch can receive and capture packets destined for its own network address from all of its
ports. In this case, the UB Switch is the target.


5.3.3 Network Traffic Isolation

5.3.3.1 NPI

A network partition refers to a set of UB Controllers that provide services for IP network interface
devices. Each partition is uniquely identified by a network partition identifier (NPI). Traffic between
different partitions is isolated.




                                          Figure 5-8 NPI definition




unifiedbus.com                                                                                            150
5 Network Layer



The NPI field is 25 bits in length, with the highest single bit being the Permission bit and the following
24-bit ID representing the network partition value.

      1.   Traffic is isolated between UB Controllers with different NPIs.
      2.   Network partitions with the same ID need to be further determined whether they can
           communicate with each other based on the value of the Permission bit. If the value of the
           Permission bit is 0, it indicates a high privilege. If the value of the Permission bit is 1, it
           indicates a low privilege. UB Controllers with either high-high or high-low privileges can
           communicate with each other, while those with low-low privileges cannot communicate with
           each other.
      3.   An ID value of 0 indicates an invalid value. A UB Controller is prohibited from sending IP
           packets with LPH.CFG set to 3 or 4 until a valid NPI has been configured.
      4.   An ID value of 1 indicates the default network partition.


5.3.3.2 Network Traffic Isolation of UB Controllers

UB Controllers SHALL support trusted NPI configuration and anti-spoofing. When sending a packet, the
UB Controller adds the NPI. Upon receipt, the receiver checks the NPI. Packets with mismatched NPIs
are discarded. UB Controllers SHALL support two working modes: strict mode (Mode-S) and loose
mode (Mode-L), as shown in the following figure:




                                   Figure 5-9 Working modes of UB Controllers

      1.   Strict mode (Mode-S): UB Controllers do not trust the software stack's network interface devices.

           (1) Multiple network interface devices (including sub-interface devices) created based on a
                 single Entity belong to the same single NPI A.

           (2) When a packet is transmitted, NPI A is encapsulated in the packet header. UB
                 Controllers allow only packets carrying NPI A to be transmitted.

           (3) The UB Controller verifies the NPI when it receives the packet. It discards the packet if
                 the verification fails.




unifiedbus.com                                                                                               151
5 Network Layer



      2.   Loose mode (Mode-L): UB Controllers trust the software stack's network interface devices.

           (1) Multiple network interface devices created based on a single Entity can belong to
                 different NPIs. Each network interface device belongs to exactly one NPI.

           (2) When a packet is transmitted, the corresponding NPI of the corresponding network
                 interface device is encapsulated in the packet header.

           (3) When receiving the packet, the corresponding network interface device verifies the NPI.
                 It discards the packet if the verification fails. UB Controllers MAY assist in NPI filtering,
                 discarding packets with invalid NPIs and blocking denial-of-service (DoS) attacks.


5.3.3.3 Network Traffic Isolation of UB Switches




                                 Figure 5-10 Network isolation of UB Switches

UB Switches MAY enable network traffic isolation through NPI filtering rules configured per port. Each
port MAY be assigned with one or multiple NPIs. Edge UB Switches check the NPI field during packet
transmission. Packets that violate the filtering rules are discarded. For an IP packet destined for a UB
Switch, the UB Switch MAY check the NPI after receiving the packet to prevent any unauthorized
accesses or malicious attacks.

If administrators do not trust edge devices, the network traffic isolation function of UB Switches MAY be
enabled. UB Switches MAY also enable the NPI replacement function when sending or receiving
packets, that is, allowing the value of the packets' NPI field to be replaced with the configured value.


5.3.4 Quality of Service
The network layer uses SL to indicate the priority of different packets on a link. SL values are assigned
based on service planning and are not specified in this Specification.

For multiple VLs in use, UB Controllers SHALL support SL-VL mapping and scheduling between VLs,
and UB Switches SHALL support scheduling between VLs. The detailed implementation is not specified
in this Specification.




unifiedbus.com                                                                                               152
5 Network Layer



5.3.5 Congestion Marking

5.3.5.1 General Requirements

UB Controllers and UB Switches MAY support multiple congestion marking modes, including Confined
Active Queue Management (CAQM) and Forward Explicit Congestion Notification (FECN).

      1.       CAQM: CCI.Mode = 3'b000
                               Byte 0                                                      Byte 1
  7        6         5         4      3          2
                                                 Enable   1   0      7     6      5        4          3   2   1   0
                                      RSVD




      Mode                 LoC                            C    I                               Hint


                                          Figure 5-11 Format of the CCI field in CAQM

               −   Enable: Indicates whether CAQM is enabled.

                   ▪ 1: enabled

                   ▪ 0: disabled

               −   Hint: Indicates the bandwidth increase requested by a UB Controller of the sender. The
                   Hint unit can be customized by vendors. Vendors MAY customize the Hint unit, provided
                   that the UB Controller's and UB Switch's Hint units SHALL remain consistent.
               −   I: Indicates acknowledgement of bandwidth increase request. If the available bandwidth of
                   a UB Switch meets the requested bandwidth increase, the I bit is set to 1; otherwise, it is
                   set to 0.
               −   C: Indicates the congestion marking bit. If congestion occurs when a packet arrives, the C
                   bit is set to 1.
               −   LoC: Indicates the location where congestion occurs, which assists a UB Controller of the
                   sender with transmission control. 1 indicates a last-hop UB Switch of the receiver. 0
                   indicates an intermediate UB Switch.
      2.       FECN: CCI.Mode = 3'b100
                               Byte 0                                                      Byte 1
  7        6         5         4      3          2        1   0      7     6      5        4          3   2   1   0
      Mode                 LoC                                       RSVD                                     FECN
                                             Figure 5-12 Format of the CCI field in FECN

               The FECN field is 2 bits in width, indicating the congestion level.

               (1) 2'b00: unmarkable

               (2) 2'b01: markable, indicating light congestion

               (3) 2'b10: markable, indicating no congestion




unifiedbus.com                                                                                                    153
5 Network Layer



               (4) 2'b11: markable, indicating severe congestion

               Note: When a protocol stack that relies on IP ECN uses a UB link to send and receive packets, the
               conversion between the IP header's ECN and the CCI field's FECN SHALL be implemented. When a packet
               is sent, the ECN in the IP header is copied to the FECN in the CCI field. When the packet is received, the
               FECN in the CCI field is copied to the ECN in the IP header.

      3.       FECN_RTT: CCI.Mode = 3'b010
                            Byte 0                                                       Byte 1
  7        6        5      4       3       2      1       0       7      6       5      4       3       2      1       0
      Mode                LoC                                   Timestamp                                       FECN
                                  Figure 5-13 Format of the CCI field in FECN_RTT

               Timestamp: Indicates the timestamp filled by the UB Controller of the sender. The UB Switch
               MAY not process the timestamp field. The timestamp is returned to the sender by the UB
               Controller of the receiver through CNP. The precision of the timestamp is determined by the
               sender and is not specified in this Specification.
      4.       Reserved: CCI.Mode = Others


5.3.5.2 FECN Congestion Marking

      1.       Congestion detection and marking
               UB Switches SHALL support marking the packets sent with FECN information based on the
               congestion status of its egress port.

               (1) If FECN is unmarkable, the packet shall not be marked with FECN regardless of
                   whether there is congestion or not.

               (2) If FECN is markable, when the congestion level at this node is higher than the mark
                   carried by the packet, the packet should be re-marked with both FECN and LoC flags.
                   Otherwise, it should not be marked, and the congestion status of the most congested
                   point on the network path should be passed to the destination.

      2.       Congestion spreading detection and avoidance
               The hop-by-hop backpressure mechanism of credit flow control at the data link layer may
               lead to the spread of network congestion. Consequently, a UB Switch in a state of congestion
               may not be the root of that congestion. UB Switches MAY optionally support congestion
               spreading detection, marking packets with FECN only at the source port where the
               congestion originates. This function SHALL be enabled or disabled by the system
               administrator.


5.3.5.3 CAQM Congestion Marking

CAQM is an active queue management mechanism that supports congestion marking and incremental
bandwidth control. Before sending packets, the UB Controller of the sender SHALL clear the C bit.




unifiedbus.com                                                                                                         154
5 Network Layer



When congestion occurs, the UB Switch SHALL set the C bit to 1. The UB Controller of the sender MAY
set the I bit to 1 when sending packets to request an increase in transmission bandwidth. If the UB
Switch determines that the bandwidth increment indicated by the Hint field may lead to congestion, it
will set the I bit to 0. The UB Switch MAY fill the Hint field with the congestion level, which MAY be
defined by vendors.


5.3.6 Deadlock Avoidance
The hop-by-hop backpressure mechanism of credit flow control at the data link layer may create a loop
dependency in the buffer of UB Switches, leading to deadlocks and preventing all packets along the
entire path from being transmitted. The following figure illustrates a typical deadlock scenario:

      1.   Node D cannot promptly process packets from Node B and exerts backpressure on UB Switch 4.
      2.   UB Switch 4 applies the backpressure to UB Switch 3.
      3.   UB Switch 3 subsequently pushes backpressure to Node C and UB Switch 2.
      4.   UB Switch 2 responds with backpressure towards Node B and UB Switch 1.
      5.   UB Switch 1 redirects this backpressure to Node A and UB Switch 4.
      6.   UB Switch 4 applies the backpressure to Node D and UB Switch 3, resulting in a deadlock.




                           Figure 5-14 Schematic of a typical deadlock scenario

The following mechanisms MAY be used to prevent and resolve deadlocks:

      1.   Routing deadlock prevention: A specific routing algorithm may be used to eliminate the
           conditions that lead to deadlocks based on the actual network topology.
      2.   Active VL switching for deadlock prevention: On a network that supports multiple VLs, loop
           dependencies can be eliminated by configuring an Input VL-Output VL mapping relationship
           on a specific node, thus preventing deadlocks.
      3.   Timeout packet discarding: If a queue has not been scheduled beyond the agreed time, it
           may be considered that a deadlock has occurred. At this point in time, discarding all packets
           in the queue may resolve the deadlock.



unifiedbus.com                                                                                           155
5 Network Layer



5.3.7 ICRC
The 32-bit ICRC field is located at the end of the packet and provides end-to-end integrity protection by
covering the immutable fields within the packet. When a UB Controller or UB Switch sends a packet, it
calculates an ICRC and appends it to the packet. Upon receiving the packet, the receiver verifies the
ICRC. If the verification fails, the packet is discarded.

      ⚫    For packets with LPH.CFG set to 3 or 4, the scope of protection starts from the IP header.
      ⚫    For packets with LPH.CFG set to 6, the scope of protection starts from NTH.
      ⚫    For packets with LPH.CFG set to 7, the scope of protection starts from NTH.

ICRC is calculated as follows:

      ⚫    The CRC-32 polynomial of Ethernet 0X04C11DB7 is used (IEEE Std 802.3™ - 2022).
      ⚫    The initial value is 0xFFFFFFFF.
      ⚫    The values of the CCI and LBF fields in NTH are replaced with all ones for ICRC calculation.
      ⚫    The values of the Time to Live, Header Checksum, and ToS (DSCP & ECN) fields in the IPv4
           header (IETF RFC791) are replaced with all ones for ICRC calculation.
      ⚫    The values of the Traffic Class (DSCP & ECN), Flow Label, and Hop Limit fields in the IPv6
           header (IETF RFC2460) are replaced with all ones for ICRC calculation.
      ⚫    The values of the checksum fields in the UDP header are replaced with all ones for ICRC
           calculation.
      ⚫    Bit 0 to bit 7 in each byte of the packet are reversed for CRC calculation. The resulting CRC
           is then bit-reversed and inverted to obtain the ICRC. The following figure shows an example.




unifiedbus.com                                                                                        156
5 Network Layer




                         Figure 5-15 Example of bit reversal for ICRC calculation


5.3.8 Maximum Packet Length
The maximum packet length supported by UB Controllers and UB Switches SHALL be greater than or
equal to the sum of the maximum data payload length and the total lengths of all headers and trailers at
the link layer and above, including LPH, NTH, TPH, and TAH as well as ICRC.




unifiedbus.com                                                                                         157
